From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hanselman. It's a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologist is Scott Hanselman hosted
by Carl Franklin. This is Lauren's
Ryan announcing show number one
36. Recorded live Wednesday, October 29th, 2008.
Support for Hanselman it's just
provided by teller rad controls
and the most comprehensive suite
of components for windows forms
and asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottelerikdotcomandby.net
developers journal the world's leading.net
developer magazine online at www
dot  dot com. In
this episode, Scott talks with
each team at the Microsoft
research section at this year's
professional developers conference in Los
Angeles. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman and this is another
episode of Hansel minutes and
I'm here at Microsoft PDC
2008 in Los Angeles. And
I just happened to be
wandering around by myself here
at the Microsoft research booth.
What they're calling MSR at
PDC. I'm just going to
wander around from booth to
booth and see what folks
at Microsoft research are working
on so high. So what
am I looking at here,
sir? Scott, you are looking
at Microsoft research Alto collage.
This is an application that
came directly from research to
a product. One of our
researchers a while ago came
up with this idea of
creating an automatic collage of
a photo collection. Okay, so
I'm looking here, I'm sitting
here with Alison Sol, a
development manager with Microsoft research,
and I'm looking at pictures
of people's faces kind of
organized in a really attractive
a collage, but not just
a collage where pictures have
been thrown up against a
window, but it's, it's nice
and square. There's fades between
pictures. And I noticed that
everyone's face is visible in
this, this collage. Exactly. So
just paper, it was published
two years ago for the
secret wishes, the most important
confidence in computer graphics. And
it has all the details
of how to create a
collage automatically you point to
a folder and you get
those images through those equations
and it will come up
with a collage automatically for
you. We solve is as
a very good technology that
had the potential of being
integrated in to some Microsoft
product or as it was
this particular case, we will
bring this to market directly.
Okay. So this is a
paper that was published. It
looks like at SIGGRAPH Oh
six, I've been at SIGGRAPH
a number of times, it's
really the most important computer
graphics symposium and conference that
there is. And I'm looking
at an application, which kind
of looks like a, a
windows live gallery, and it's
sucking images out of a
directory. We've got images of
ducks, candles and people and
places, and you're browsing those
images. And right now they're
just kind of scattered on
an, on a, on a
palette. This is a scatter
view. So  wants to
give you exactly the idea
that you got those pictures
in your folder. You'll throw
them away, run lonely. And
now you want to create
a collage out that you
need to tell us is
how many images you want
in this collage from seven
to 25, and then you
press the create. Okay. So
he's got 25 images in
his collage here and he's
pulled a slider bar and
now they're kind of the,
the images are dancing around
the screen and kind of
almost like Tetris, they're finding
the right place. It doesn't
look like they were going
to make a perfect square,
but then they did. And
they came together into a
collage of seven images, all
with nice blur effects. Now,
how did it, how did
it know to keep that
castle in frame and that
door and frame? Why didn't
it? Why did it not
clip that incorrectly? Exactly. All
the collage, the technology behind
you is if you look
back at the origin of
just technology, it tries to
address four problems. One given
a large set of images,
how to select a smaller
set that represents that larger.
So it has to recognize
that these are images that
are similar in some way
that's representative of a set.
Yes. Then for each one
of these images, it will
select a region of interest
that has to be in
the final collage. Okay. So
it looks like from the,
from the paper here, which
is written from the point
of view of a PhD,
this image has to be
substantial, substantial, something significant that
you would look at when
you see this image, it's
representative of that image. Like,
So now each of those
inner images that you want
to place in the collage,
they have to go to
a position in the collage
that allows that regional interest
to appear yet. It allows
some overlaps to the next.
It has to have enough
of a margin where it
doesn't lose the region of
interest, but still looks right
when put next to the
next, the next image. And
finally, we have to blend
together those so that the
transition from one image to
the next one is a
smooth transition. When not just
something that you can easily
see, that that image is
started here. And the next
one was ending in the
final column. Now I've seen
these collages being built over
the last several minutes and
it never seems to get
one wrong. They always look
nice. Is there some, what
are some images, examples of
images that would confuse the
algorithm? And it would look
bad. Like if you took
an image, two images together
that were of maybe one
of people and one of,
I don't know, insects, would
it caused them to create
an unattractive collage? Can you
fool the system? The only
images that we have that
really created collage that were
not nice are images that
are not pictures, are images
that we created manually. Like
for example, if you have
an image that is some
color, some single color, one
single digital image that is
the blue color or another
one that is the red
color that will not pay
a nice collage. The application
will not never find nice
borders and nice ways to
make a transition from one
The next. So abstract and
artificially created images, but images
of the real world typically
have something that's coherent. And
you're trying to take a
picture of something. So I
wonder if you took pictures
of clouds and tried to
do that if you had
confused, No, because see clouds,
even though you don't see
those very clearly, they have
variations of the tone of
this clouds color. So that
is something that the algorithm
will consider, and it will
use that to make the
transition as smooth as possible.
The only way that we
really found that can create
a very ugly collage is
if you digitally create an
image that has a single
color, and then you tried
to create a collage of
single. Now we're looking at
a picture, we're looking at
one, two, three, four, five,
six, seven pictures of people.
And one of them has
a picture of you with
a wax Albert Einstein. And
I noticed that when it
was creating the collage, it
definitely thought that was a
person. It put a, I
put a square over his
face. So this knows not
just about significant images, but
if there's a face there,
it really tries hard to
make sure that it might
cut off your body, but
it keeps the face. Exactly.
We are using very good
technology from Microsoft research for
face detection, about 70% of
the faces that are looking
at the camera with the
text perfectly. So it's very
hair for you to miss
a face. But the application
is to allows you, if,
for example, here we are
looking at the picture of
two phases. Let's assume one
of those, where was not
that active. You could manually
come here and say, Oh,
this is the entire 80
that we faces in this
image. And then the application
would consider that and not
have any of those phases,
Curtin Collage. So you're using
the facial recognition, taught technology
as a, a weighted hint
to say, this is a
significant area of interest. Now,
I suppose I could lie.
Let's say that this picture
of this couple is them
getting married. And I want
to Mark his, her hand
because it has a wedding
ring. Exactly. What you just
said is exactly what some
of our users are applying.
Just men will face that
they're looking for. And it
is very interesting because most
of our customers that use
these, they use for animals,
people that like cats and
dogs, of course, we don't
have a cat face detection
technology app, but what they
do is they come here
and if they have, for
example, cat or a dog
In the picture, they come
and they find that as
a face area and the
dire face of the cat
or dog appears in the
final collage. Fantastic. Now people
can see this at research.microsoft.com/auto
collage. And I'll put a
link to that in the
show notes, is this something
that people can download right
now? Or they can only
see videos of it happening,
Right. They can download right
now. It works for windows
XP and windows Vista. And
it only requires.net 3.0 because
we are using WPF for
losing either face. Well, fantastic.
Thank you, Alison. So development
manager at Microsoft research in
Cambridge. Thanks a lot. We're
wandering around at PDC. I'm
at Microsoft research at PDC
or what they're calling MSR
at PDC and I'm with
Christian clinic, a researcher at
Microsoft in Redmond. And what
have we got for me
here today? What, what are
you working on? So this
project is called blues and
it's for all intents and
purposes, it's a newsreader. The
distinguishing features to all other
news aggregation sites is that
it allows you to look
at news and context. What
I mean by that is
it allows you to surface
news. And at the same
time for every article you
happen to be interested in,
you also get all the
blog commentary that we were
able to, to crawl for
that specific article. So for
example, here we have broken
down the commentary into liberal
and conservative bloggers. And while
I'm surfacing here right now
is an article on Troopergate.
And if we drill down,
we see that there were
three conservative bloggers who have
commented on this and not
surprisingly 15 liberal ones. Now
for each of these comments,
I can actually click on
them and surface the blog
post as well. Okay. So
how did you know that
those bloggers were conservative? These
three? Did you manually do
that and look at it
as a human and say,
we have identified this as
a right. Blog is a
very good question. We actually
stayed away from that. So
there are two sources of
information there, either some bloggers
who self identify. And in
addition, there are some preexisting
lists that classify bloggers into
conservative and liberals. However, we
stayed away from making that
judgment ourselves. So that information
though comes from from other
humans who are not us,
there's no computer system that
decided that they were Right.
That's correct. And it's an
input to our system. It's
not something that we are
dealing with in any way.
So we're looking at an
application that has blue on
the left and red on
the right. We've got a
bar chart that's showing off
to the left, indicating that
for example, a 15 bloggers
with a large blue bar
or were liberal or left
leaning and had a comment
on Troopergate. And I assume
that you identified those because
they linked to that, that
story. That's correct. So then
the input is the story,
the number of logs that
linked to it, and then
the, whether or not that
blog was left or right,
Correct. Again. And we actually
create all of that input
by crawling the web and
having a continuous blog stream
that feeds into our system,
which we then clean. We
find duplicate news because a
lot of AP stories get
published on different news sites.
So we clean those up.
We figure out which are
the duplicates. We aggregate all
the links and then have
a server, which is accessed
by this small visual client
that you see. Yeah. So
the bar charts make it
clear whether a liberals or
conservatives are particularly interested in
that story. For example, there's
one from the Washington post
that indicates that Pailin makes
a pit bull look tame.
And interestingly, there are 21
reactions from the liberal side,
probably jumping on that and
saying that that's important to
them while only one conservative,
but there's also a little
gray box and there's some
different colored boxes, gray boxes,
orange, yellow boxes. And then
the, whether one, two or
three, what data is that
indicating to me? So the
final piece of this puzzle
is the fact that we
try to look into the
emotional charge in the discussion
where you have a scale
from going to pure from
pure statements of fact, things
like the fed raised interest
rates, by a point today,
two things that are highly
emotionally charged, something like this
is an outrage. How could
they do that? And we
try to give for any
set of blog comments and
indicator that tells us how
charged this discussion has been.
And this is visualized as
small, glowing boxes on the
side, the more boxes and
the more the glow around
it, the more charge in
the discussion. So one of
these stories here from the
New York post is indicating that
a Domino's pizza worker has
been hounded by community activist
groups. On the liberal side,
it indicates that there were
three boxes. So that liberal
blogger has said something that's
very emotionally charged. While on
the right hand side, there
have been eight conservative reactions.
There's only one box. That's
an occasion that they're speaking
just the facts, Correct. I'm
not sure if it's just
factual, but the language is
very neutral. It's not charged
at all, Maybe inflammatory language,
but that's not using highly
charged emotionally loaded language. Yes,
exactly. Now, where do you
see this going? We're in
an emotionally charged time and
we have the election available
to us, but how do
you see this research going
into the future? So there's,
there's two, two pieces. This
puzzle. The one thing is
that we enable two things
that a user can do.
One is just seeing the
news and context. The other
is actually prioritizing what they
want to read. So I
can ask questions now, like,
what are conservatives talking about?
What are liberals talking about?
What have been the interesting
stories in the past, there's
a keyword search engine integrated
here. So for all intents
and purposes, it allows you
to focus your news, reading
to what you, whatever you
happen to be interested in.
The other piece of the
story is the fact that
unlike this demo here, this
of course generalizes easily beyond
just the political domain. So
you could imagine this going
for financial news for product
reviews, for sports news, and
also for different ways of
splitting of sort of chopping
down the blogosphere. Right now,
we just split into liberal
and conservative bloggers, but it
could be anything that you
could imagine, a breakdown into
location, gender, special interests, affiliation
with certain sports teams, affiliation
with certain employers, et cetera.
Now, from your chart here
and all the glowing boxes.
If I indicated that I
was interested only in reading
news, that is not emotionally
charged, it looks like I
would have nothing to read.
No, actually that's not quite
true, but in the political
domain, it's, it tends to
be rare, very rare. I
wish I wish we had
more factual information, but it
doesn't really look like that
right now, Chart there's virtually
nothing that is not at
least contained some emotionally charged
language. Are you using that
as just English keyword searches
to say that what's an
example of something emotionally charged,
that would cause one of
these glowing boxes to appear.
So What we started out
with is actually have we
had humans label, hundreds of
blog posts. First we tested
if humans agree in their
judgments, which turned out to
be roughly true. And then
we trained up a machine
learning based classifier to figure
out how well does this
classifier emulate the human judgments.
And the classifier gets things
in quotes, right about 80%
of the time, and indeed
uses keywords and combination of
keywords. So we use one
grams, two grams and three
grams. And this enables us
to differentiate between things like
good, not good and not
very good, which are all
very different shades of gray.
And so having more words
and context makes the, makes
the classifier smarter. Now the
source information from my point
of view appears to be
news. So all of these
are blog reactions on news
items. You don't have any
opinion items and then opinions
on those reactions on those
is, is the intent here
to show factual information as
the baseline source and then
opinion on those, or are
the other options or the
other things that you're looking
at liberal news and conservative
news. I'm trying to understand
if this is simply opinions
about facts or opinions about
opinions. The, the prime motivation
was when we started all
of this was actually to
look into, to get a
sense of how news is
received. Now, the problem with
any sort of new site
and even a lot of
the commentary is that people
try to write in a,
at least on the surface,
very objective way, which frustrates
any pure machine-based attempt to
find any spin, find any
sentiment. So based on that,
we looked into the context
of news to see if
that gives us a better
handle on how news is
received, who likes what news.
And if there potentially is
either a spin or a
drift in these things. Now
this whole notion of spin
is not something we surface.
We try to make everything
as transparent as possible. So
what we surface are only
things like how many bloggers
from which camp have linked
to something and allow people
to draw their own conclusions.
Yet at the same time,
it turns out that for
any newspaper article, the context
actually carries a lot of
information that you would miss.
If you purely read the
news. Now, if an article
was, was ultimately really quite
neutral, one of these things
that might be marked for
example is liberal, but the
comments on the same page
were highly emotionally charged. How
do you deal with that?
Our comments and additional and
separately segmented bit of information.
Cause I might be interested
in neutral reporting with very,
very liberal comments, Right? And
right now the emotional charge
only refers to the comments,
not the news at all.
So we do differentiate between
that and what you could
see if you had the
UI as sort of, when
you click on the comment
section for any individual article,
you get the location of
the blogger. You typically get
the title of the blog.
So you get a very
nice overview to start to
begin with of what people
have been saying. And then
you, then you have the
ability to drill down. What
about the additional drilling, the
additional layer of the comments
of the readers of this
particular blog? So here's a
news article. Here's one blogger
who is quote, unquote, commenting
on that, but they may
have a very active comment
board that feels like that's
an additional kind of access
of information. It appears to
me that you are basing
this person's very emotionally charged
blog entry on, I assume
the text that appears on
the permalink of the page
that you crawled, you have
no way of distinguishing between
the story itself and the
comments that appear below the
fold, Right? That's, that's completely
right, right now we are
for all intents and purposes,
ignoring the commentary. That is
something that's in the making.
And we hope to add
at some point in the
future, but it's not being
surfaced. Interesting. So what do
you plan on doing with
this technology? The most important
thing is sort of finding
the right sweet spots to
surface this. This is available
to anyone within Microsoft. So
all you have to do
in order to try this
out is to go to
MSW search for blues, spelled
B L E w S.
And the first page that'll
come up is the blues
page with detailed project members
and a nice link that
once you click on, it
will actually give you the
user interface that we're looking
at right now. So that'll
let me as an internal
Microsoft employee do that. Is
there any idea of putting
this on research.microsoft.com and showing
it to the public at
some point Potentially? Yes. However,
there's already something that's available
outside already, too, and that's
called the social streams project.
So if you go to
social streams.live labs.com And I'll
put links to that in
the show notes for everyone
to see What you get
is a portal that has
been built by the social
media team in live labs,
who we've collaborated with, and
which incorporates a small pieces
of code from the Blue's
code base as well. And
it gives you the same
browsing experience in the sense
that I can browse for
news. I can browse for
blogs. I can browse for
people and whatever I'm focused,
I'm focusing on. I can
now drill down into related
blogs related news at any
point in time it's being
continuously updated. So it follows
the news 24 seven. It
just launched, I think, two
weeks ago, maybe three weeks
ago. So it's just gearing
up and it has a
significant user. Cool. Well, thank
you so much. Christian clinic
researcher with Microsoft research for
talking to me here at
PDC. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman with a word from
our sponsor. Do you know
how to build web 2.0
Ajax applications with web 1.0
components? You really can't. If
you want to do the
next generation web applications you'll
need next generation components. Just
like the ones that our
friends at Telerik have got
their rad controls for ESPN
and Ajax. It's a huge
pack of web controls built
on top of asp.net Ajax.
That'll add previously impossible performance
interactivity to your next project.
The new controls mirror, the
Ajax API from asp.net. So
development is really straightforward. The
client scripture shared. So loading
time is not a problem.
If you just set a
couple of properties and you'll
be able to automatically bind
to web services for a
really efficient operation, the new
rad editor from ESPN Ajax,
Telerik loads up to four
times faster than before. And
the new rad grid handles
thousands of records and just
milliseconds, but as always, it's
best to try for yourself.
So you can visit
dot com slash ASP, net
Ajax, and download a trial.
Thanks a lot. So continuing
to wander around the Microsoft
research boot here at PDC,
and I'm at MSR at
PDC, I just stumbled upon
Andrew bagel, a research researcher
at Microsoft research. And he's
got a thing that says
deep IntelliSense. I love IntelliSense.
It must be better if
it's deep. Andrew, what have
you got to show me
today? Well, For deep IntelliSense
is a way for developers
and testers to look at
their code when something has
happened to their code, but
they weren't looking. So what
we have inside deep intelligence
is a way to mine
the repository. So if your
version control system of your
bug database of your discussion
forums of your outlook messages
or email mailing lists, and
try to find out anything
that might be related to
the source code that you're
looking at in your editor.
So I'm looking at a
visual studio instance here up
on your big screen, and
you've got some toolboxes on
the right that say current
item related people, event history,
and it's got all sorts
of information. It looks like
some, some calendar items, some
tasks and email. You've got
some bugs in it. You're
pulling this information from all
over. Yes. So basically for
people who are doing investigations
like developers, when they're trying
to understand the rationale behind
bugs, what they need to
do is to look at
all the places that they
can find information that where
somebody might've been talking about
a particular piece of code
that they were probably unfamiliar
with. So often need to
bug your way into somebody
else's code. And you want
to know how did it
get this way? Because it's
causing a problem in my
code. So what they do
is they look at usually
developers tell us that look
at the most recent check-in
and they say, well, let's
let me look at the
diff between the previous one
and the current one, and
I can find out what
exactly happened. Okay. And it's
the same, what kind of
thing? Over and over. It's
like, okay, here's some code
I haven't seen. Let's push
the blame button. Who did
that code? What do I
know about that guy? When
we're doing all of this
rote work ourselves, let's open
up outlook, let's do a
search. I'm hearing you say
you're doing all of that
for us. Yeah, exactly. So,
and even worse, they're often
going into their version control
system. They find that there's
a checkin on a particular
date made by a particular
person. And there's no way
to correlate that with stuff
that comes from the bug
database. Often what they'll do
is they'll do the search
for the same date, same
time and try to see
if somebody edited a bug
or a work item that
the check in that they
think is potentially fixing. So
what is your input into
this? Is it the project
plus the file name and
the line number or at
what level of granularity are
we looking at these, this
bit of deep information? So
the information granularity is really
on the class method, field
and property boundary. So we're
actually parsing the source code,
both on the backend. When
we crawl these repositories and
we form, we put all
the data we have into
a big database. And whenever
you're roaming around the code
inside visual studio, you click
on a function or click
on a method or click
on a field. We look
up the qualified name of
what we find inside our
database. And we take a
look at all the different
bugs and checkins that we
found that are related to
it. That we've discovered that
related to it. Now, is
this information gonna going to
change as I move around
this file, can you show
me that you're going to
move around in a method
by method basis here? So
if I scroll up here,
we can click on blog
enabled method, and then the
views on the right change
to show me that blog
enabled had two check-ins between
November of last year and
August of this year. And
that the check-ins happened by
this guy, the kid who
turns out to be the
most, the owner of the
code, because he's got all
the commits. Interesting. So, and
then looking on the right
hand side here, we've got
a number of bits of
information that are hyperlinked. So
the kid who is the
username of the person who
worked on this particular property
is hyperlinked. If I click
on him, do I get
to I am him? Or
what do I see if
I learn about the kids?
If you click on the
kid, you can send him
an email message through covid.com.
So the source code we're
looking@itactuallycomesfromcodeplex.com, which uses a team
foundation server backend. So the
most of the information is
coming from team foundation server,
but code Plex has additional
information about people and about
discussion forum messages, which happened
on the website. Now, do
you have just specific projects
that you've set up here
to do? Can you check
out my code flex projects
and see information, or have
you pre pre primed the
pump here? We're pre priming
the pump. We have a
client service solution. So the
server has let loose on
your source code repository, and
then crawls, everything takes a
few hours. And then you
point your visual studio clients
at that SQL server backend,
and to get all the
data that you want. Whenever
I look at Microsoft research
stuff, I always feel like
I'm seeing a preview of
some product in like, you
know, 2020. It feels like
this might be, you know,
VSTS 2020. This is a
really taking collaboration to the
next level is the goal
to somehow push this into
a product someday. That would
be a nice goal. We
talked to the development groups
all the time to try
to show them our stuff
and get them excited about
maybe taking this into the
next version of visual studio.
So we're, we're in the
middle of that kind of
process right now. And is
that how it typically works
in Microsoft research? I mean,
you know, Andrew bagels just
sitting around, he goes, you
know, we should do this,
you pitch it to your
boss. He gives you some
money, you pull it off
and then you go shop
it around Almost. I don't
really need to pitch ideas
to my boss or get
money. I just do it.
And then when we finish
it, we usually pitch it
around. We have a tech
Fest conference every year. We
already show off what Microsoft
research does to the rest
of Microsoft to try to
get them excited about the
kinds of things that we
do. And if they're in
the product planning phase, they
usually come to us and
say, I have this idea.
I didn't know if it
was doable, but I see
your product. I want that.
And realized that you guys
had that level of freedom
as researchers, you can just
work on whatever is the
most interesting to you. Exactly.
And aren't there researchers that
are working on things that
aren't interesting and they get
feedback that this thing you're
doing is boring. Not that
I think you're doing something
boring. Well, we have other
ways to get evaluation other
than product groups, which is
academic papers and sort of,
if it's going to be
innovative research, work in the
academic community, then that's value
for us as well. And
how long do you work
on something like this before
you decide that it's baked
and you're going to move
on to the next thing.
This was a three month
project I did with an
intern last fall. And I
spent the last month sort
of jazzing it up for
PDC. But other than that,
we haven't really worked on
it that much, but it
is leading into our next
project, which we're currently working
on back at Microsoft. That
is an amazing amount of
work in three months. Now,
is this something that people
can see@theresearch.microsoft.com site or may
see movies about this information?
They can see a webpage
that I wrote about it.
And also I wrote an
academic paper about it that
they can download. If they
do go to research.microsoft.com, the
tool itself is not available
for download to the external
community. Well, thank you so
much. Andrew bagel, a researcher
at Microsoft research for talking
to me today at PDC
2008. Thanks very much continuing
to wander around the Microsoft
research booth here at PDC
at MSR at PDC, I've
just come upon a project
called chess, and I'm speaking
with shells.  a researcher
with Microsoft research. So what
is chess? And what are
we looking at? Chess is
a tool that can help
you find and reproduce in
a systematic and deterministic fashion
bugs that we call Heisenberg's.
So highs and bugs. The
name comes from Heisenberg's uncertainty
principle from back in the
thirties, where the idea was
that if you observe a
physical system, then you change
its properties. So you're not
actually observing the system. So
these are the kinds of
bugs that when you try
to observe them to find
their cause the bugs just
disappear into you. Now was
this the gentleman that said
that you could tell where
something was or how fast
it was going, but, but
not, not both time. Exactly.
That's right. I remember someone
telling me that a Heisenberg
had pulled over by the
police one time and the
guy said, you know how
fast you're going? And he
said, no, but I know
exactly where I am. That
might very well be. Yeah,
I understand that. There's been
a number of bugs that
I've had where I'm debugging
something and it just doesn't
do the same thing in
release mode while debugging. It
works one way, but otherwise
it's It doesn't. So sometimes
it works in the release
mode and it doesn't work
in the debug mode, but
they, even, the worst thing
is that when it does
not work in the release
mode and then you have
to patch it and fix
it. And when you try
to run it in the
debug mode, the bug doesn't
happen anymore. And now you're
stuck because you can reproach.
So how does chess make
this easier? Ah, so the
way chess makes us easier
is that we have identified
that the main cause of
these kinds of Heisenberg's Is
concurrency. So concurrency and other
way to understand concurrency is
that in a multiple multithreaded
application, you have these threads
running and their relative timing
causes problems. So sometimes one
thread goes faster. Sometimes another
thread goes faster and depending
on which thread is going
faster, you get different outcomes.
So what chess can do
is systematically generate all possible
orders of events of the
threads in your application. And
when it does that systematically,
it will eventually find hopefully
a particular execution order that
causes a bug. And once
it finds it, it remembers
it. And the next time
you run the application, it
can reprove that. Now does
this where I like we
all like to think that
our programs are deterministic and
they run the same way
every time are these kinds
of concurrency out of ordering
issues, an issue of the
program or doing things like
inserting sleeps and expecting that
their stuff won't be preempted,
or is this just the
nature of computing and nature
that we really didn't realize
as programmers Nature of concurrent
programs. When you ride a
concurrent program in which multiple
threads are executing at the
same time, the runtime does
not guarantee you that a
particular schedule will be taken.
You have to somehow control
the scheduling decisions by using
synchronization. But that leaves room
for still a huge number
of possible schedules that runtime
can choose any one of
them. And that's the real
problem because the runtime can
choose any one of them.
And it doesn't not guarantee
that the next time you
run the program, it will
choose the exact same schedule.
So sometimes a buggy schedule
is chosen. The next time
you run it, that buggy
schedule might not be chosen.
And then you can reproduce
the bug. What does chess
do if I'm unit testing
and application that is multithreaded
to make this not a
problem anymore? Sure. So what
chess will do is it
will run your unit test
in a loop and chess
inserts. What we like to
think of as a user,
more scheduler between the application
and the underlying runtime, that
user mode scheduler intercepts calls
made to the underlying threading
primitives, and that allows chess
to hijack the scheduling and
control it. So every time
chess runs the application in
a loop, it guarantees that
a different thread schedule will
be taken using this mechanism.
Now, if I had a
highly multi-threaded application, couldn't I
get into a cross product
or Cartesian product situation where
the chess has to pick
a really, really large number
of ways that this could
run and it could take
an hour or two to
let me know all the
different possibilities, right? This is
absolutely true. In fact, there
is this commentorial explosion of
the number of possibilities that
happens as the number of
threads and the number of
steps performed by each thread
increase to give you an
idea of the number of
threads is in. And the
number of steps performed by
each thread is key. Then
the total number of possibilities
is exponential in both an
end game that is really
large. So, but what chess
does is it intelligently picks
these executions that it's trying
to explore. And it has
two different ways of combating
this commentorial explosion. One is
that oftentimes a schedule once
executed is equivalent to many
other possible schedules that could
be good, that could be
executed and chess recognizes that
and just prunes them away.
The second thing chess does
is it prioritizes even among
the schedules that it generates
those schedules that are more
likely to yield bugs. So
let me explain that a
little bit more. We have
observed that preemptions, which are
essentially unexpected context switches are
a real problem in causing
concurrency bugs. So what jazz
does is it says that
it works on this hypothesis
that you need to preempt
at unexpected places to cause
bugs, but you don't need
too many such preemptions. So
what you can do is
you can tell chess to
give Jess a parameter that
okay, bound the number of
preemptions by a say two,
and then chess will systematically
generate schedules in which there
are no more preemptions than
two. So it investigates all
possible place for preempting, but
does not have more than
two preemptions. And this is
very useful because most boasts
a lot of concurrency bugs
that we have found. They
just require one or two
preemptions, and we have found
bugs in large applications using
this method. So let me
see if I can paraphrase
what you just said to
make sure that I understand
it. So now I understand
why this is called chess
because you're making many moves
ahead to see what's going
to happen and then make
the right move for the
future. So in the first
example, you're basically making a,
I guess the equivalent of,
of a hash to say
that this, this thread, this
preemption style and that presenters
are they really hashed at
the same thing. So by
testing, either of them, we
have tested that, that scenario,
right? And then in the
other example, you're in, in
the next way, you're making
out basically a bell curve
and you're saying, we're going
to hit 80% of the
Newer half of the bell
curve. Right? So then you
can basically say, how Exhaustively
do we want to explore
the problem space, which is
ultimately what chess systems like
deep blue do they say?
You know, I have a
pretty good confidence of winning.
If I make this move,
I could probably keep going
for another million years, but
I wouldn't necessarily change the
testicle value of me winning
that's exactly Right. So this
is a very good analogy
from the point of view
of chess, chess wins when
it finds a bug. So
there are lots of strategies
for finding bugs, right? A
strategy, essentially, a schedule that
it can pick. And what
chess is doing is in
this astronomical space of schedules,
it's trying to look for
schedules that are more likely
to yield bugs. And these
are schedules that have fewer
preemption. So what does this
look like physically? I add
a reference in my ms.
Unit test application. Do I
attribute things or how do
I get chest involved? It's
actually very simple. If you
have visual studio team test
installed on your machine, then
all you have to do
is install chess also, and
chess has, is incorporated. Chess
can be then invoked by
giving a host type attribute
called chess to your unit
test. And is this acting
as a profiler or how
are you injecting yourself into
this process? Ah, so basically
what happens is that when
the deal gets loaded into
memory, that the dealer containing
the unit test checks just
hooks into it and it
does IRL rewriting, so that
all the calls to the
system dot threading, API, all
the concurrency API, they get
rerouted to chest rappers and
the chest wrappers make callbacks
to the chess user mode
scheduler. And in addition, pause
those calls to the actual
API. So where can people
learn more about this and
is this something that can
be downloaded in a research
form and, and played with
it all? You can get
lots of information about chess
from the chess website and
the website is research.microsoft.com/projects/chess. And
I'll put links to that
on the show site. Oh,
that'd be great. And the
website contains a download of
chess for unmanaged code and
a whole bunch of research
papers and PowerPoint presentations explaining
the chess system. In addition,
the latest set of chess
bits will be available via
the dev labs portal in
a few months. And these
bits will contain both unmanaged
and managed chess as well
as the visual studio team
test integration of managers. Fantastic.
Thank you so much. I
was clear a researcher from
Microsoft research for sharing chest
with me and making concurrency
easier for the masses. You're
welcome, Scott. Thanks for coming
by Continuing to wander around
here at MSR at PDC,
and I've stumbled upon Jared
Jackson and I'm looking at
a big flat screen monitor
with a really beautiful view
of a, of a map
of a topological map. And
then I've got some what
appears to be windows, workflow
workflows? Well, what am I
looking at Jared? So you're
looking at two things on
the big screen. The map
that you saw there is
actually a application called Cove.
It's, it's written by the
university of Washington who are
a partner of ours. It
works with a lot like
a virtual earth, except that
when you get to the
ocean, it doesn't stay flat
across the ocean. It'll actually
go deep, deep down into
what they call the symmetry,
which is the topography only
underneath the water. And what
we've done is at Microsoft
research is which is on
your other screen, is this
product called Trident. And what
it is is it's an
interface into windows workflow for
scientists who are doing this
research. So what came out
of the oceanography side of
things here in the, our
partners over at the university
of Washington and a project
called Neptune, what they've done
is they've taken a whole
bunch of fiber optic cable
and actually trenched it into
the bottom of the ocean
and then go way out
from the shore. And they're
going all around the Juan
de Fuca plate. That's just
off the coast of Washington.
And they're reading a bunch
of values, you know, heat,
temperature, salinity, current, things like
that. And they bring in
all that data and it
represents quite a bit of
data, say these onsite on
chores data centers, then they
need to do computation on
top of that so that
they can get to an
end result data product. So
these aren't developers, and this
is why they're not using
visual studio. These are researchers
and you're trying to make
it easier for them. Cause
this appears to be a
windows workflow workflow, and you
have the workload Steiner, but
the, the ID is vastly
simplified. This doesn't look like
visual studio. So there's actually
two tiers. The people who
do research in the research
community, the researchers themselves, and
then they tend to have
postdocs and grad students that
are doing some of the
grunt work behind the scenes.
Well, that's all good and
welfare to getting the coding
done, but the researchers are
not programmers and they need
to have an interface where
they can take whatever the
programmers have done it, and
actually be able to not
just run it, but, but
to change things, research is
changing all the time. So
they want to see a
data product and then maybe
make an adjustment to it.
And by giving them this
simplified interface, they can go
in and just get some
dragging and dropping and some
double clicking and typing. They
changed the parameters all around
and get a whole new
date, data product out of
it. And that really is
the point in the story
that the windows workflow team
is saying is that you
might build an application that
is largely complete, but that,
that business logic in the
middle might be changing as
your business needs change. So
that makes total sense where
our researcher would want to
use a visual workflow to,
to do their, to do
their work. What is this
workflow doing here? Take healer.
One is the simplified version
of one that's run over
and over again on notion
and graphic side, they read
a file it's called net
CDF. The format is, and
net CDF is, is two
oceanographers. Like XML is test
developers. They read that and
then they do a processing
step on it. And that
can get really involved in
our demo here. All it
does is it filters out
some of the outlier values.
And from that they produce
a new net CDF file.
That's the third step in
our, in our particular workflow
here. And once that's done,
you have a lot of
options. Do you, do you
publish it? Do you send
it off to, to this
visualizer over here? Well, that's
what we're doing. The very
last step is called COVID
messages sends a message to
our underwater visualizer called Cove
that tells her that there's
a new data product available.
And it will visualize that.
Can you run this right
now and make something happen
on the big screen here?
We're looking at a map,
a topographical map. It's a
big, big fault line there.
I had no idea that
was floating right off the
coast. There. It's really quite
interesting to see the, the
underlying surface of the ocean.
I just don't think about
this really is a planet.
That's a bunch of different
floating template. You know, my
I've got a young, a
young child in his, his
skull has just come together
and a doctor was telling
me, well, it's really an
eight parts that are floating
around his brain. And the
earth seems to be the
same way. So you've just
launched this workflow and it's
popped up a little balloon
help. And the tray here
and something is firing off
some messages if appeared on
the, on the screen what's
happening. So what happened? The
workflow launched over here on
one machine. And the very
last step after about about
a minute of processing was
that it had a file
ready for it. And it
sent a message to Cove
saying that something was available
and we just had a
window pop up that said,
Hey, I have a new
data set available. Do you
want to load it? And
It looks like it says,
model file from Monterey. So
you're doing something off the
coast of Monterey and there's
a big fault line there.
So we're processing that information.
It says completed a load,
that model file for Monterey
Bay and see what happens.
This is all very friendly.
The researchers not looking at
any kind of code, there's
nothing textual here. They're not
really sweating any of the
details. So while we're waiting
for the progress bar here,
I'm just, I'm just thinking
that this really is kind
of the whole point of
windows workflow. You might create
an application that is almost
a little development environment, but
it's specific to the business.
In this case, the business
of research is we're trying
to accomplish. You find that
the research has really understand
what this visualization, right? This
is a little bit separate
than the visualization that you'll
happen to see in, in
safe. You opened up a
workflow in the visual studio
designer. And one of the
big differentiators is the fact
that data is a first
class visualization inside of this.
Researchers are very concerned about
what happens to their data
every step of the way.
And we visualize that directly
in inside of Trident. This
reminds me of applications like
Yahoo pipes, where they're hiding
an entire programming language around
just moving data from one
process to another. And all
you ever think about is
data. There's all sorts of
control, flow things, but ultimately
they're just trying to filter
or sort, or remodify. Yeah,
you could argue that in
windows, workflow control flow is
the number one artifact for
how everything gets executed. From
our point of view, data,
data flow is the number
one thing. Control flow is
still important, but it's probably
second seat to the flow
of the data itself. And
did you have to write
your own kind of owner
draw or custom representation of
what a workflow is? So
this is, this is an
entirely custom WPF application, as
well as the designer surface
itself. Yeah, we did. This
is based on windows workflow,
3.5, what you're seeing here.
And so it was actually
less code to write a
WPF app that we're looking
into the workflow and then
redesign it all from our
understanding and what we've seen
in WWF 4.0, when that
starts coming out, we can
probably rehost the designer that's
there. Well, this is a
fairly simple workflow with four
boxes and inputs and outputs.
Can you drill into this
and look at the other
nodes or what are these
nodes that don't have lines
connecting them? I can see
here that name, you know,
trial name goes to file
name and input goes to
output, but can you drill
in at all? So if
you see a line between
the output of one activity
and the input of another,
that means there's a data
binding. So the result of
that, the output from the
first activity will be the
input for the other one,
but you can set things
just like you would like
in a, in the parameters
of a method. So if
you double click on an
input, for instance, it'll bring
up a dialogue with a
box where you can actually
enter in the value as
a, as a literal, as
opposed to something that's bound.
Every one of every one
of those is set up
to do that. And these
solid ones. In fact, there's,
there's a, there's a key,
these are color, and there's
a key. You can drop
down to find out what
the types are of all
the inputs and outputs. So
that helped you match which,
which ones would link together.
And on top of that,
there's a sense of required
inputs and optional inputs. So
if it looks filled in,
like, you'll see on the
input for our processing step,
you have to have that
data. These other two are
optional. Interesting. Then when you
pull down the list of
data types, you had things
that I recognized like string
and end, and then you
had hypercube string in and
hypercube that exactly the three
top data types that I'm
using. Well, string an in
certainly as way up there,
hypercube is something that's very
specific to. And anybody who's
into computation in the scientific
realm would understand it. It's
a four-dimensional table, basically. So
this is the hypercube, like
the kind that I would
think about it, it's a
cube, but then you add
another dimension and then it
becomes hard to visualize it
is. And so in the
scientists' sense, it's X, Y,
Z, and T, right? So
it's, it's three dimensional space,
plus the time series and
think that X, Y you
get in high school Z
you get, when you go
to college and then nobody
gets T until they get
a PhD. Right. Well, does
anybody really understand time? Yeah,
hopefully the guys at Microsoft
research do, because I sure
don't with my community college
education. So it looks like
our, a progress bar here
is at 98% and it's
marching on. And then what
are we about to up
98? What are we going
to see here on our
giant, our giant map, I'd
hate to ruin the surprise,
but I think we're probably
going to zoom into Monterey
Bay and see some temperature
values. So we just had
a heat map appear and
we zoomed in on Monterey
Bay. And there's a lot
of information here. It's a
heat map because we can
see that the water is
one temperature here and another
temperature there, but there's also
depth. And what else are
we looking at? It's actually
also a time series. So
it'll animate. If we click
right here and you have
to look kind of closely,
but you'll see, as, as
the time goes on, you
can see the timescale and
then in the bottom corner,
and then the colors actually
animate and show you where,
and when it's getting hot
or when it's getting colder.
Interesting, you know, it's got,
this reminds me of those
things you see at the
sharper image where it's a
play a plane that's filled
with nails and you put
your hand on it and
it pushes some of the
nails up and some of
them down. So you've got
not just heat and time
and depth, but temperature at
depth. So there's a lot
of information being displayed there,
which explains why it took
so long to load up
across a network, even, you
know, so this is real
data. This wasn't, can you
really brought this down from
the university of Washington? Yeah.
I'll even show you can,
if you want to have
any question about that, you
go to the first activity.
Look what the input happens
to be as coming from
some skyline server at the
university of Washington. This is
actually a Monterey Bay data
from, I think, 2005 actually.
Well, so he's just, double-clicked
on, on the workflow here,
brought up a file name
and it's just a straight
HTTP address, or you're pulling
this directly from, from their
web, their web server. Absolutely.
Cool. Well, thank you so
much, Jared Jackson for taking
the time to talk to
me here at Microsoft research
at PDC. Thank you.